---
SPDX-License-Identifier: CC-BY-4.0
copyright:
  - SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Â© 2021 Arm Limited <kristof.beyls@arm.com>
title: 'Low-Level Software Security for Compiler Developers'
documentclass: report
papersize: A4
colorlinks: true
link-citations: true
bibliography:
- book.bib
header-includes:
- |
  ```{=latex}
  \usepackage{makeidx}
  \makeindex
  \newcounter{TodoCounter}
  \usepackage[backgroundcolor=white,linecolor=black]{todonotes}
  \let\oldtodo\todo
  \usepackage{bclogo}%  \bcpanchant
  \renewcommand{\todo}[1]{
    \stepcounter{TodoCounter}
    \oldtodo[caption={\arabic{TodoCounter}. #1}]{\bcpanchant #1}
  }
  \newcommand{\missingcontent}[1]{
    \stepcounter{TodoCounter}
    \oldtodo[inline,caption={\arabic{TodoCounter}. #1}]{\bcpanchant \textit{#1}}
  }
  ```
...

# Introduction

Compilers, assemblers and similar tools generate all the binary code that
processors execute.  It is no surprise then that for security analysis and
hardening relevant for binary code, these tools have a major role to play.
Often the only practical way to protect all binaries with a particular security
hardening method is to let the compiler adapt its automatic code generation.

With software security becoming even more important in recent years, it is no
surprise to see an ever increasing variety of security hardening features and
mitigations against vulnerabilities implemented in compilers.

Indeed, compared to a few decades ago, today's compiler developer is much more
likely to work on security features, at least some of their time.

Furthermore, with the ever-expanding range of techniques implemented, it has
become very hard to gain a basic understanding of all security
features implemented in typical compilers.

This poses a practical problem: compiler developers must be able to work on
security hardening features, yet it is hard to gain a good basic understanding
of such compiler features.

This book aims to help developers of code generation tools such as JITs,
compilers, linkers and assemblers to overcome this.

There is a lot of material that can be found explaining individual
vulnerabilities or attack vectors. There are also lots of presentations
explaining specific exploits. But there seems to be a limited set of material
that gives a structured overview of all vulnerabilities and exploits for which
a code generator could play a role in protecting against them.

This book aims to provide such a structured, broad overview.  It does not
necessarily go into full details.  Instead it aims to give a thorough
description of all relevant high-level aspects of attacks, vulnerabilities,
mitigations and hardening techniques. For further details, this book provides
pointers to material with more details on specific techniques.

The purpose of this book is to serve as a guide to every compiler developer
that needs to learn about software security relevant to compilers.  Even though
the focus is on compiler developers, we expect that this book will also be
useful to other people working on low-level software.


## How this book is created

The idea for this book emerged out of a frustration of not finding a good
overview on this topic. Kristof Beyls and Georgia Kouveli, both compiler
engineers working on security features, wished a book like this would exist.
After not finding such a book, they decided to try and write one themselves.
They immediately realized that they do not have all necessary expertise
themselves to complete such a daunting task. So they decided to try and create
this book in an open source style, seeking contributions from many experts.

As you read this, the book remains unfinished. This book may well never be
finished, as new vulnerabilities continue to be discovered regularly. Our hope
is that developing the book as an open source project will allow for it to
continue to evolve and improve. The open source development process of this book
increases the likelihood that it remains relevant as new vulnerabilities and
mitigations emerge.

Kristof and Georgia, the initial authors, are far from experts on all possible
vulnerabilities. So what is the plan to get high quality content to cover all
relevant topics?  It is two-fold.

First, by studying specific topics, they hope to gain enough knowledge to write
up a good summary for this book.

Second, they very much invite and welcome contributions. If you're interested
in potentially contributing content, please go to the home location for the
open source project at <https://github.com/llsoftsec/llsoftsecbook>.

As a reader, you can also contribute to making this book better.  We highly
encourage feedback, both positive and constructive criticisms.  We prefer
feedback to be received through <https://github.com/llsoftsec/llsoftsecbook>.

\missingcontent{Add section describing the structure of the rest of the book.}
 
# Memory vulnerability based attacks and mitigations

## A bit of background on memory vulnerabilities

Memory access errors describe memory accesses that, although permitted by a
program, were not intended by the programmer. These types of errors are usually
defined [@Hicks2014] by explicitly listing their types, which include:

  * buffer overflow
  * null pointer dereference
  * use after free
  * use of uninitialized memory
  * illegal free

Memory vulnerabilities are an important class of vulnerabilities that arise due
to these types of errors, and they most commonly occur due to programming
mistakes when using languages such as C/C++. These languages do not provide
mechanisms to protect against memory access errors by default. An attacker can
exploit such vulnerabilities to leak sensitive data or overwrite critical
memory locations and gain control of the vulnerable program.

Memory vulnerabilities have a long history. The [Morris
worm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morris_worm) in 1988 was the first widely
publicized attack exploiting a buffer overflow. Later, in the mid-90s, a few
famous write-ups describing buffer overflows appeared [@AlephOne1996]. [Stack
overflows](#stack-overflows) were mitigated with [stack
canaries](#stack-overflows) and [non-executable stacks](#stack-overflows). The
answer was more ingenious ways to bypass these mitigations: [code reuse
attacks](#code-reuse-attacks), starting with attacks like
[return-into-libc](#code-reuse-attacks) [@Solar1997]. Code reuse attacks later
evolved to [Return-Oriented Programming (ROP)](#code-reuse-attacks)
[@Shacham2007] and even more complex techniques.

To defend against code reuse attacks, the [Address Space Layout Randomization
(ASLR)](#code-reuse-attacks) and [Control-Flow Integrity
(CFI)](#code-reuse-attacks) measures were introduced. \todo{Refine section
links used here and in the previous paragraph.} This interaction between
offensive and defensive security research has been essential to improving
security, and continues to this day. Each newly deployed mitigation results in
attempts, often successful, to bypass it, or in alternative, more complex
exploitation techniques, and even tools to automate them.

Memory safe [@Hicks2014] languages are designed with prevention of such
vulnerabilities in mind and use techniques such as bounds checking and
automatic memory management. If these languages promise to eliminate
memory vulnerabilities, why are we still discussing this topic?

On the one hand, C and C++ remain very popular languages, particular in the
implementation of low-level software. On the other hand, programs written in
memory safe languages can themselves be vulnerable to memory errors as a result
of bugs in how they are implemented, e.g. a bug in their compiler. Can we fix
the problem by also using memory safe languages for the compiler and runtime
implementation? Even if that were as simple as it sounds, unfortunately there
are types of programming errors that these languages cannot protect against.
For example, a logical error in the implementation of a compiler or runtime for
a memory safe language can lead to a memory access error not being detected. We
will see examples of such logic errors in compiler optimizations in a [later
section](#jit-compiler-vulnerabilities).

Given the rich history of memory vulnerabilities and mitigations and the active
developments in this area, compiler developers are likely to encounter some of
these issues over the course of their careers. This chapter aims to serve as an
introduction to this area. We start with a discussion of exploitation
primitives, which can be useful when discussing threat models \todo{Discuss
threat models elsewhere in book and refer to that section here}. We then
continue with a more detailed discussion of the various types of
vulnerabilities, along with their mitigations, presented in a rough
chronological order of their appearance, and, therefore, complexity.

## Exploitation primitives
\missingcontent{Discuss exploitation primitives}

## Stack overflows
\missingcontent{Describe stack overflows and mitigations}

## Code reuse attacks
\missingcontent{Discuss ROP, JOP, COOP and mitigations (ASLR, CFI etc)}

## Non-control data exploits
\missingcontent{Discuss data-oriented programming and other attacks}

## Hardware support for protection against memory vulnerabilities
\missingcontent{Describe architectural features for mitigating memory vulnerabilities and for CFI}

## Other issues
\missingcontent{Mention other issues, e.g. sigreturn-oriented programming}

## JIT compiler vulnerabilities
\missingcontent{Write section on JIT compiler vulnerabilities}

# Physical access side-channel attacks

\missingcontent{Write chapter on physical access side-channel attacks.}

# Remote access side-channel attacks

This chapter covers side-channel attacks for which the attacker does not need
physical access to the hardware.\todo{Define side-channel better.}

## Timing attacks

An implementation of a cryptographic algorithm can leak information about the
data it processes if its run time is influenced by the value of the processed
data. Attacks making use of this are called timing attacks\index{timing
attacks}.

The main mitigation against such attacks consists of carefully implementing the
algorithm such that the execution time remains independent of the processed
data. This can be done by making sure that both:

a) The control flow, i.e. the trace of instructions executed, does not change
   depending on the processed data. This guarantees that every time the
   algorithm runs, exactly the same sequence of instructions is executed,
   independent of the processed data.

b) The instructions used to implement the algorithm are from the subset of
   instructions for which the execution time is known to not depend on the data
   values it processes.
   
   For example, in the Arm architecture, the Armv8.4-A
   [DIT extension](https://developer.arm.com/documentation/ddi0595/2021-06/AArch64-Registers/DIT--Data-Independent-Timing)
   guarantees that execution time is data-independent for a subset of the
   AArch64 instructions.

   By ensuring that the extension is enabled and only instructions in the subset
   are used, data-independent execution time is guaranteed.

At the moment, we do not know of a compiler implementation that actively helps
to guarantee both (a) and (b). A great reference giving practical advice on how
to achieve (a), (b) and more security hardening properties specific for
cryptographic kernels is found in [@Pornin2018].

As discussed in [@Pornin2018], when implementing cryptographic algorithms, you
also need to keep cache side-channel attacks in mind, which are discussed in the
[section on cache side-channel attacks](#cache-side-channel-attacks).

## Cache side-channel attacks

<!-- markdown-link-check-disable -->
\missingcontent{Write section on cache side-channel attacks. See
\href{https://github.com/llsoftsec/llsoftsecbook/pull/24\#issuecomment-930266031}{the first comment on PR24}
for suggestions of what this should contain.}
<!-- markdown-link-check-enable-->

# Supply chain attacks

A software _supply chain attack_ occurs when an attacker interferes with the
software development or distribution processes with the intention to impact
users of that software.

Supply chain attacks and their possible mitigations are not specific to
compilers. However, compilers are an attractive target for attack because they
are widely deployed to developers, in continuous integration systems and as
JITs. Also, an infected compiler has the possibilty to make a much larger
impact if it can silently spread the infection to other software created with
or run using it.

This chapter explores the history of supply chain attacks that involve
compilers and what can be done to prevent them.

## History of supply chain attacks

As far back as 1974 Karger & Schell theorized about an attack on the Multics
operating system via the PL/I compiler [@Karger1974]. In this attack, a trap
door is inserted into the compiler, which then injects malicious code into
generated object code. Furthermore, the trap door could be designed to reinsert
itself into the compiler binary so that future compilers are silently infected
without needing changes to their source code. This attack method was
subsequently popularised by Ken Thompson in his 1984 ACM Turing Award
acceptance speech _Reflections on Trusting Trust_ [@Thompson1984].

If these cases seem far-fetched then consider that there have been several real
examples of supply chain attacks on development tools.

Induc is a family of viruses that infects a pre-compiled library in the Delphi
toolchain with malicious code [@Gostev2009]. When Delphi compiles a project the
malicious library is included into the resulting executable, thus enabling the
virus to spread. The virus was first detected in 2009 and was circulating
undetected for at least a year beforehand. Several popular applications are
known to have been infected, including a chat client and a media player.
Overall, in excess of a hundred thousand infected computers were detected
world-wide by anti-virus solutions.

XcodeGhost is the name given to malware first detected in 2015 that infected
thousands of iOS applications [@Cox2015]. The source of the infection was
tracked down to a trojanized version of Xcode tools. The malware exists
in an extra object file within the Xcode tools and is silently linked into each
application as it is built. File sharing sites were used to spread the
trojanized Xcode tools to unwitting developers.

A trojanized linker was found to be involved in a supply chain attack discovered
in 2017 named ShadowPad [@Greenberg2019]. Some instances of the attack were
perpetrated using a trojanized Visual Studio linker that silently incorporates
a malicious library into applications as they are built. Related attacks named
CCleaner and ShadowHammer used the same approach of a trojanized linker to
infect built applications. Infected applications from these attacks were
distributed to millions of users world-wide.

These cases highlight that attacks on compilers, and especially linkers and
libraries, are a viable route to silently infect many other applications, and
there is no doubt that there will be more such attacks in the future. Let us
now explore what we can do about these.

\missingcontent{Explain how these vulnerabilities arise and how to mitigate them.}

# Other security topics relevant for compiler developers

\missingcontent{Write chapter with other security topics.}

\missingcontent{Write section on securely clearing memory in C/C++ and undefined behaviour.}

# Appendix: contribution guidelines {-}

\missingcontent{Write chapter on contribution guidelines.
 These should include at least: project locaton on github; how to create pull requests/issues.
 Where do we discuss - mailing list? Grammar and writing style guidelines.
 How to use todos and index.}

\printindex

\listoftodos

# References {-}
::: {#refs}
:::
